# TC39-TG5-5 2024-08-07

**Remote attendees:**
| Name              | Abbreviation | Organization     |
| ----------------- | ------------ | ---------------- |
| Mikhail Barash    | MBH          | UiB              |
| Yulia Startsev    | YSV          | Mozilla          |
| Michael Dyck      | MD           |                  |
| Richard Gibson    | RGN	         | Agoric           |
| Jack Works        | JWK          | Sujitech         |
| Juho Vepsäläinen  | JV           | Aalto University |
| Michael Coblenz   | MC           | UCSD             |
| Asbjørn Orvedal   | AO           | UiB              |


## Meeting:

### Subject: UiB's work on PL standardization	

MBH: (presentation)
  
JV: suggestion to compare with the open-source evolution 

JV: an interesting question to study is how a language's evolution process affects the adoption of a language

JV: consider maturity levels of processes

MC: Will you give recommendations to TC39 regarding the TC39 process?

MBH: This work is a descriptive study. We can indeed give recommendations to TC39, and it'll be up to the committee on whether they'll follow them or not. 

MC: interesting to study how a process document itself evolves

MC (in chat): https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capability_Maturity_Model_Integration

JV: about maturity levels: say, level 5 would mean that most mature level, the "ideal" process

YSV: what an "ideal" process is, will differ between languages

YSV: difference between standardization (which by definition requires multiple vendors) and evolution (can be done by a single vendor)

JV (in chat): https://github.com/tc39/tg5/issues/4#issuecomment-2264699897

### Subject: [issue 4](https://github.com/tc39/tg5/issues/4)

JV: the current discussion needs "crystallization" of the research question

### Subject: a study on MessageFormat 2.0 ([issue 3](https://github.com/tc39/tg5/issues/3))

MC: (presentation)

YSV: For MessageFormat, some of the questions that you asked here are very specific to MessageFormat.
The thing about MessageFormat is that it's split between two standards bodies.
That's part of the problem with it.
I don't know if you've gotten this layer of the discussion with MessageFormat.
So, it's been standardized in Unicode,
and TC39 has blocked further work on MessageFormat because we can't be sure that the design in Unicode is the right one.
So, one question I have for you is: how do we go about validating that the design that we've come to is the right one?

YSV: Just a little context here, something I've noticed as we design in TC39 is this:
as we design internally, there's this gradual shift, there's this idea, let's say, pattern matching.
Everybody has an idea of what pattern matching, people have written pattern matching in Rust or in other languages and they want basically that,
but then the question of how does this translate into something in JavaScript, is different.
Then we iterate, we iterate, we iterate, and eventually we have something that nobody recognizes and the question is:
is it still fulfilling the problem that introducing pattern pattern matching was supposed to solve?
So, that's something I would be interested in for the case of MessageFormat to see to validate is this the right design.
Is that an interesting problem?

MC: Yes, definitely. I mean, I think about this in terms of expressiveness.
There are two flavors: (1) can you actually solve the problems that you need to solve,
and can you write the programs that you need to write? And then,
(2) does it provide the kind of safety or structural properties that you wanted?
You have to ask what the goals are.

YSV: Yeah.

MC: You can do an empirical comparison between what the language is good for and what the original goals were.
There's a question of whether the original goals were the right goals?

YSV: Yes, exactly. When we're designing, we sometimes get blinded a little bit by aesthetics and we see that happen pretty frequently in TC39.
Something we've been trying to focus more on is that any introduction to the language needs to solve a real problem and that problem must
be something that you can articulate. If you can't articulate it, then why are we introducing this new thing to the language?
That's something that Mozilla has been doing pretty heavily in recent years because we've been finding this drift of purpose
that a new language feature takes on, can make it really confusing to decide whether or not it should be let added to the language.

YSV: And the risk here is when we add something to the web platform, it is there forever. We cannot take it back.
What I was thinking with this work is actually: this would be a case study, we're starting to think out how do we protect against that drift to ensure:
(1) that we really understand the problems that we're solving (we sometimes don't);
(2) we have a way to validate those problems are being solved by the proposal.
Those are some of my thoughts here.

MC: I think that's really great. Maybe we should start with some sort of needs assessment,
actually work with localizers, get a corpus of messages that they would like to have written but couldn't.
And use that as a corpus with which to evaluate possible designs. If they can express all the things that they wanted to express,
then that's a good start, at least in terms of expressiveness.
It's a separate question about usability.

YSV: Yeah. I wonder: because I haven't actually been involved in the design of this proposal, it's been my colleague,
I wonder how much of this work they've already done. I did understand from him that this was partially done on his intuition,
so I don't think they have a corpus, but they might have something.
How involved are the champions with helping you understand what they want?

MC: So far, I'm not sure who these people are yet.

YSV: Probably you guys have had one meeting for sure, right?

MC: I had one one meeting with EAO, I think. 

YSV: Good.

YSV: So, there's another thing that is going through my head right now.
The kind of scrutiny that would be brought on by this kind of work might not be scrutiny that's welcomed.
This is also been a reason why introducing evidence-based work has been a struggle at TC39, because, first,
it's hard work, second, the thing that you want might not be the thing that you get.
But we need to work with the people who are the designers of the proposal in order to get that stuff.
So, I would like to have what you described -- basically getting a corpus of how localizers behave now,
and what they wish they could have written.
That would have been very useful to do at the beginning of this work.

YSV: And then using that to evaluate whether or not we've made the right design to solve the underlying problems.
That would be really convincing.
That would be, I think, that's the thing that would move the needle on TC39, because right now,
the thing that's going to happen is it's currently in candidate status at Unicode,
and it's going to come out of candidate status and no one can use it because it hasn't been used in TC39.
So, TC39 is going to continue to not be convinced. 

YSV: Okay, I've been talking for a long time. Somebody else has their hand up.

MBH: Juho, you had a question?

Juho: I was just asking if you could have people, I mean ask the question, so just give more information.
So they consider the context: they have people that are trying to learn the thing, and they have experienced people,
they like to use some other tools, they know what to expect. And you have this clueless people,
completely different groups. I think for the clueless, if you provided a good chatbot with the right context,
that it understands the specification, you could look into how are they learning the specification,
what kind of questions are they asking about the specification, what kind of tasks they have in mind,
to get a better idea of what are they trying to learn. I think that would be how I might try to understand
how somebody without any clue about the topic is getting into the topic. 

MC: It seems like, if I can be connected to a community of localizers...
Is is there a place where these people gather? Or the mailing list? So, how would we find these people?

YSV: The person to talk to to get access to that would probably be EAO and his collaborators.
So, what's the status of your conversation with with him so far, is he excited about this work? 

MC: it's nit him that I was talking to...
We had one meeting with [Erlango](https://github.com/echeran),
that's who I talked to, not EAO.

YSV: Okay, so you didn't speak with EAO. I can ask EAO if there is, first of all, if prior work has been done,
and also who to get in touch with. We do have localizers here at Mozilla,
but you said you didn't want just one company, right? 

MC: I mean you have they have to start somewhere.
So you know those are the ones we have easy access to, that's probably a good place to start.

YSV: Okay, I can ask around at my company. We're having an all hands next week.
So I'll be talking directly to those people.

MC: Okay, great, thank you.

YSV: I'll update on the issue what the progress is there.

MC: If you have a timeline, I can think about,
because I need to put an [IRB](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Institutional_review_board).

YSV: I will try to get information from my side to you by the end of next week.
I don't know if it would be fruitful though. 

MC: Okay, all right.

MBH: Richard?

RGN: There is also for that work a weekly meeting, open to anyone.
It's chaired by [Addison Phillips](https://github.com/aphillips). It's on the TC39 calendar,
so attending a session is probably a really good way to get information quickly.

MC: Okay. So I don't quite understand, you're talking about the relationship between Unicode and TC39.
I don't quite understand what that relationship is. Could you maybe explain that more, Yulia?

YSV: So, the web platform in particular is quite layered. We take other specifications and we build on top of them.
For example, we import the Unicode specification into the JavaScript specification in order to talk about how things are decoded.
We have a modification also because we have to support an older version of Unicode, so there's been some drift between the two specifications. 

YSV: So, work is sometimes done in one body and then iterated on further in another body, and that's what's happening here.
So, the actual message format, the syntax for it, is being done inside of Unicode,
and it's going to the candidate phase now, I think.
They're expecting to ship next year.

YSV: But TC39 doesn't take all of Unicode, they take parts of it, parts that they decide are extremely stable and that they can build upon.
So, the request here was: we want this new API in JavaScript called MessageFormat2 that will take this syntax from Unicode that was developed there,
and imported into TC39. The editors effectively said no to this, because we don't know if the Unicode standard will actually be used.
That's the biggest risk. And we don't know if it's actually solving the necessary problems.
If we import it and it's not solving the necessary problems, then we've imported basically a dud, and it has to live on the web forever,
whereas Unicode in the past has deprecated certain features. We can't do that.

YSV: Layering, this is what TC39 is based upon, and then there are other things that are based upon TC39.
So other specs layer on top of TC39, or you could consider them siblings, so that would be HTML, WebAssembly,
and there's an entire community of interacting standards in this space.

MC: I see. So, is that really the key differerence, like Unicode can deprecate features, and TC39 can't?

YSV: Well, there are a number of differences, and that's one of them. For example,
we still have to support unpaired surrogates, which I believe is no longer possible in Unicode,
but we still support them.

YSV: We have also in the past deprecated things in order to allow certain optimizations to be possible,
but we did it because it was minimally backwards incompatible. There were some breakages, but we have to be very careful about it,
as the impact of making a backwards incompatible change on the web is quite significant.

MC: So, is that the issue with the unpaired surrogates?

YSV: Yeah, that's why we can't remove this.

MC: Yeah. Okay.

MC: I mean, this seems like a really good place to start, just trying to find out what the needs are.
So, I think if you can help connect me to people, I can start working on [IRB](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Institutional_review_board).
This isn't kind of study that requires deep experience to actually run the study.

YSV: Yeah.

MC: So I may be able to find somebody who can do it.

YSV: Yeah, and you know, I would really so the thing that I would really like to approach this
with is with the mind of this being the basis for a framework, long term. So we're trying some stuff out,
seeing how the industry reacts to it. In the past I've tried to bring experimentation to TC39 and it hasn't been successful.
Well, it was middilingly successful, but I think repeated attempts and trying to understand how best to get the committee
to accept certain things, that's one thing that I think would be interesting from this work.
So, yes, we are solving a concrete problem with MessageFormat, but with an eye to "this is the framework for validation of proposals".
If that's interesting to you. Because there are other interesting things, you talked about the design space:
"feature A versus feature B, does that work better"? Those are all interesting questions,
in this case I'm particularly interested in is what we ended up with actually what we wanted.
I will put you in touch with people. I am kind of with one foot in another area, so I may not be the best person for this,
but I will try to get the right person to pick this work up.
So, you will hear from me before at the end of next week for that.

MC: Great, thank you. Okay, this is very promising. I'm excited. I think this is exactly what I want to do.
