# TC39-TG5-6 2024-08-28

**Remote attendees:**
| Name              | Abbreviation | Organization      |
| ----------------- | ------------ | ------------------|
| Mikhail Barash    | MBH          | UiB               |
| Yulia Startsev    | YSV          | Mozilla           |
| Chris de Almeida  | CDA          | IBM               |
| Aki Rose Braun    | AKI          | Ecma International|
| Istvan Sebestyen  | IS           | Ecma International|
| Jesse Alama       |	JMN          | Igalia            |
| Juho Vepsäläinen  | JV           | Aalto University  |
| Michael Dyck      | MD           |                   |
| Jack Works        | JWK          | Sujitech          |
| Asbjørn Orvedal   | AO           | UiB               |


## Meeting:

### Subject: A project to implement a Proposal Management Tool

MBH: ([presentation](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1ph2O4TMr0hjaYQTFLNEaxrlPLQv8IEFUktjtWLryi5s/edit?usp=sharing))

JWK (in chat): I wonder what programming language is this

JMN (in chat): https://www.jetbrains.com/mps/

MD (in chat): Do you have a grammar validator, or is that a goal?

MD (in chat): Would people access the tool over the web?

JMN (in chat): +1 to the idea of making this web-accessible (and/or parallel to the JetBrains interfaces or whatever interface).
It would also be nice to have a locally accessible web-based version of the tool.

YSV (in chat): +1

JMN (in chat): I'd love to have some kind of search functionality (especially for notes from previous meetings).

JV (in chat): 	Could you migrate existing data (specs etc.) somehow automatically to the system?

MD (in chat): So the tool has some sort of 'Save' or 'Commit' that updates a central repository?

AKI (in chat): I understand the software, it has integrated version control with a commit dialog,
and also it's all just flat files so one could commit/push/pull however their preferred workflow (CLI, standalone GUI software, etc).

AKI (_paraphrased to reflect the general meaning rather than being a verbatim quote_): support the idea of the project

CDA (_paraphrased to reflect the general meaning rather than being a verbatim quote_): is the suggestion that this tool would supercede the tools currently used by the committee? making sure this solution doesn’t create more problems/overhead

MBH (_paraphrased to reflect the general meaning rather than being a verbatim quote_): no, the tool is supposed to be completely interoperable with the tools used by the committee, including GitHub repositories etc. The can also be used in "view-only".

CDA (_paraphrased to reflect the general meaning rather than being a verbatim quote_): what about real-time collaborative editing?

MBH (_paraphrased to reflect the general meaning rather than being a verbatim quote_): there is an initiative towards that being developed in connection to the JetBrains MPS language workbench

AKI: tool seems to be useful for other committees, the ones that we personally know/collaborate with

IS: some users need only admin background, some users need technical - how do they collaborate together?

AKI: interesting to look into scheduling with constraints

### Subject: TPAC (W3C annual conference)

AKI: For every relevant Ecma TC and TG, I'm going through the list and coming up with potentially interested WGs to go chat up.
One risk/challenge is that there's already history between a given TG and WG that I don't know about,
so I'm trying to gather as much info as possible.

